A Razor That Reaches Every Weird Spot on Your Face 


Gillette’s new FlexBall razor may be the first razor designed to eliminate craning your neck and making dumb faces while shaving.
Rather than cram more blades to its shaving cartridges, Gillette designed an entirely new handle. The key addition to the FlexBall is a more nimble pivoting head, one that swings side to side with a 24-degree range of motion and works with the company’s existing ProGlide blade cartridges.
The FlexBall isn’t literally a ball joint, but it behaves like one. Its dual-hinge system–a side-to-side pivot beneath the traditional tilting blade mechanism–allows the blade to stay in contact with skin more regularly, according to Gillette, sort of like a car with an independent suspension system.
The FlexBall’s more pliable design also means you don’t have to lift and reposition the razor as often. According to Gillette, the average number of individual lifts and strokes per shave is around 150. The new pivothead makes it more like shaving in cursive. 
In my experience, the new razor’s fluidity and flexibility does seem to come in handy when you’re transitioning from your jowls to under your jawbone or shaving along the cheekbone–prime areas to end up dotted with little squares of toilet paper. But old habits die hard, and it’s tough to get used to just shaving a large patch in one fell swoop; you’ll probably find yourself lifting the razor as often as ever to start. Is it the most revolutionary thing to ever happen in the world of shaving? No, but the experience did feel smoother than shaving with my normal razor. It is an improvement.
Still, there’s a bit of controversy surrounding the new system. New York Magazine’s Kevin Roose calls FlexBall an example of “everything that’s wrong with American innovation,” mostly because Gillette added predictable stuff like another pivot point instead of adding cooler stuff like lasers. And Quartz’s Gideon Lichfield compares the new razor to a duck’s penis.
The main points of contention are that the razor industry is always up to something, and that something has everything to do with selling more blades. In recent years, new companies such as Dollar Shave Club have established themselves as cheaper, hassle-free alternatives to the traditional routine of selling cheap handles and pricey cartridges. Coming from the old guard, a system like FlexBall seems like another forced-upgrade gimmick.
But beyond the smoother-feeling shave, there’s evidence that Gillette’s new tricks go beyond that. It has responded to Dollar Shave Club’s model by launching its own lower-priced blade-subscription service. And the fact that the FlexBall razor uses existing blades is a welcome oddity in the world of razors, where new systems are often introduced simply to sell newer, pricier cartridges. According to Gillette, the new handles will do a better job with the same blades.