A Science Experiment From Your Childhood, Turned Into Gorgeous Photographs 

 There’s a popular venn diagram out there that tries to capture the meaning of wonderment. On the left is a circle labeled “science,” on the right one labeled “art,” and there in the middle is a little slice carved out for “wonder.” “For me, wonder is the moment before you know something and the moment after you don’t know something,” explains Caleb Charland. “I want the viewer to be in the space between knowing and not knowing.”
Charland is a photographer best known for turning unseen scientific principles into art. In his earlier series, Demonstrations, Charland used flashlights, candles and magnets to expose basic scientific principles. And more recently, in his Back to Light project, the Maine-based artist is transforming a basic science experiment into a series of long-exposure photographs. “I’d study these experiments and figure out ways to make them visually interesting,” he says. “I’m trying to reveal some kind of mystery and magic through everyday objects.”
Back to Light is based on the classic potato battery experiment, which draws on the vegetable’s acid and electrolytes to generate power.  Except Charland doesn’t use just potatoes. He’s made makeshift batteries out of limes, powered a chandelier with an apple tree and illuminated a light using a single orange.
Charland works with a basic tool kit—a spool of bell wire; his connectors, which are galvanized nails wrapped with a copper wire; and his selected fruit. “Each of those clusters you see is essentially a circuit powering an LED,” he explains of his apple-powered chandelier. To power an LED that uses 3.5 watts, sometimes he can use 10 apples, other times he needs 20. Each fruit has its own source of power.  Cantaloupe it turns out, is particularly powerful. Grapes? Not so much. “I ended up wiring over 200 together and I only got maybe a volt and half out of it,” he says.
Most of his work is based on trial and error, meaning he spends a lot of his time experimenting before he gets it right. “In an ideal world I’d have funding and spend three months finding the exact voltage of every fruit,” says Charland. But then again, that sense of mystery and potential of failure is part of photography’s allure, he adds. “If you knew exactly what were going to get, and it was going to come out perfect every time, it would be kind of boring.”