ABC Doubling Down on Marvel Shows Next Fall With Agent Carter 


Despite falling ratings and critical ambivalence towards Marvel’s Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., ABC is doubling down on Marvel properties for fall 2014. Not only is the network giving S.H.I.E.L.D. get a second season, but it’s also adding a second Marvel series, the much-anticipated Agent Carter, to its slate.
What the second season of Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., announced yesterday along with the Carter series, will look like remains unclear. Last month’s Captain America: The Winter Soldier ended with the dissolution of the titular spy organization, with subsequent episodes of the television series dealing with the fallout of that development with varying degrees of success. (Anyone attempting to make the timeline of the show jibe with the timeline of the movie is guaranteed a headache, let’s just leave it at that.) The events in Winter Soldier and the first season have even left the show’s title a bit unsettled, with executive producer Jeph Loeb joking in interviews that “we don’t want to start calling the show Agents of Nothing.”
While S.H.I.E.L.D. will deal with a post-S.H.I.E.L.D. world (and, presumably, build to next May’s Avengers: Age of Ultron release), Agent Carter will focus on the origins of the intelligence organization. Co-created by Winter Soldier screenwriters Steve McFeely and Christopher Marcus, who will act as executive producers on the series with Marvel TV head Loeb, the series has been described as a take on ABC’s Alias set in the post-World War II era, with Hayley Atwell reprising her role as Sharon Carter in the Captain America films as she helps in the creation of S.H.I.E.L.D. from the ground up.
While ABC’s decision to renew Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. and order Agent Carter is far from surprising—both have been expected for months now—it was far from a definite thing. Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.‘s ratings have been in relative freefall for some time, with even the Winter Soldier tie-in providing no bump in viewership despite expectations, and both McFeely and Marcus had spoken of Agent Carter as a potential mini-series instead of a full-length project.
Both projects, too, have to deal with the revelation at the center of The Winter Soldier: that S.H.I.E.L.D. was always an offshoot of Hydra, the villains at the center of both Captain America movies to date. For Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D., this presumably means rebuilding the concept free of any corruption, but for Carter, things are far more complicated. Unless the series ends up contradicting established continuity by “revealing” that there was actually a “good” S.H.I.E.L.D. all along separate from the Hydra one, Carter has to deal with having a threat present throughout the series that not only is never confronted, but which actually wins, to some degree.
How both shows handle the Hydra problem is far in the future for now. Instead, hardcore Marvel fans and ABC executives alike can celebrate the continued partnership between the two companies (and Disney siblings). The rest of us can sit back and feel satisfied that Marvel has finally announced a project with a solo female lead after six years of unparalleled success.