Amazon Could Save Twitter From a Fatal Stall 

iframe#twitter-widget-2 {margin-left: auto!important;margin-right: auto!important;}
Twitter use is stalling, but help could be on the way in the form of one of the most popular online activities of all: shopping on Amazon. 
Amazon said today that anyone with accounts on both services can now fill their Amazon shopping carts simply by typing a hashtag on Twitter. Reply with “#AmazonCart” to any tweet containing an Amazon product link, and that item will automatically turn up on Amazon, waiting for you to buy it.
The new tool is little more than a bit of fun for Amazon, yet another way to smooth the path between wanting and buying. But for Twitter, hashtag shopping represents new territory, and if it catches on, it could help inspire lackadaisical tweeters to come back more often.   
Reply with #AmazonCart to add the Banana Slicer to your Cart! http://t.co/B39jFZITc0 pic.twitter.com/CT81jLUE1M
— Amazon (@amazon) May 5, 2014

Right now, those repeat visits are what Twitter needs most. In only its second earnings report since going public this last fall, the company said revenue and total users are up. But the stat that sent its stock sinking was a decline in timeline views. In other words, more people are using Twitter, but overall, they’re not using it as much.
We’ve seen other types of Twitter shopping in the past. Early last year, Twitter and American Express hatched a partnership that works much like the Amazon arrangement. Services like Square Market essentially turn tweets into product listings that put purchases a click away. And a relatively new tool allows app makers to advertise their creations right in users’ streams, complete with a “download” button in the tweet itself.
In each case, these examples blur the lines between an ad and a product listing that should make Twitter a powerful platform for shopping. Ads targeted to you based on your interests put the products they sell just a click or a hashtag away. And while no one has beaten Amazon at online shopping itself, Twitter and other social networks have the potential to do a much better job at mimicking what the retail industry calls the “discovery” aspect of brick-and-mortar shopping. If you know you want a camera or a case of toilet paper, you go to Amazon and search for it. Retail on Twitter, meanwhile, should be more like the non-utilitarian experience of going to a mall or your favorite stretch of neighborhood shops, where shopping is more about what catches your eye.  
Of course, teaching people that Twitter is a place to shop seems like a tough challenge when getting people to come and use it for its more basic information viewing, and sharing function appears to be problematic. Twitter’s #hashtag and @reply lexicon is part of what scares off some would-be users already. Adding another use case with its own learning curve might just come off as confusing to casual users. 
That said, if the deals Amazon offers via Twitter are good enough, users would have a strong financial incentive to figure it out. And if Amazon and Twitter together can convince brands to seed their own tweets with Amazon links, the service could start to look more like a storefront to people who aren’t as interested in Twitter as a social medium.
Users could even create separate accounts or lists that they browse purely for bargains. That reality is likely a long way away. Twitter has more immediate problems to overcome before commerce becomes a widely recognized part of the service’s identity. But the potential is there, and if anyone has shown it can turn online browsing into online buying, it’s Amazon. One-click, meet one-tweet. 