An Awesome Font Culled From 2,000 Pieces of Beach Debris 

 One day while walking along the beach in England, Dion Star stumbled across a little green clothespin. Being a graphic designer, Star immediate realized that this pin was more than just a bit of litter that washed up on shore. To him, it was a letter A. As he continued his strolls, Star started seeing letters and numbers everywhere—a bit of frazzled string that looked like an S, a hunk of metal that resembled a W, a plastic tab shaped like an 8.
“I’ve always been interested in the color and form of marine litter, so I decided to collect a few pieces from the beach with a view to creating something,” he says.
That creation was Marine Debris Typeface, a full set of letters made up of the 2041 pieces of junk Star went onto collect. From the start, the designer set a few guidelines: no bottles, cans, plastic bags or candy wrappers. He only wanted pieces that had washed up on shore. He also committed to keeping everything as-is.  “The rules were to find the letterforms as they were, with no manipulation of any kind,” he says. “With some letters it would have been easy to bend or twist something to fit–but that would have been cheating my own rules. I enjoyed the idea that this was just a search and I didn’t have to do any thinking, just walk and observe.”

The most common letter was O, but there were plenty of A’s, C’s and J’s too. More difficult to pin down were E, K, M, D, and Q. “It felt like a real achievement to find those letters,” he recalls. “I was quite lucky to find 2 fridge magnets in the shape of a letter D and K” he says.
The junk makes for an eclectic visual mix, but Marine Debris is about more than making a pretty typeface. It’s also an investigation into the visual language of a particular place–a prompt to see the stories that pop up when you look a bit harder at your surroundings. The story in this case, clearly, is that there’s a whole lot of trash out there. “Being able to draw attention to the waste that went into the production of the font is the bigger story,” he explains. “The number and type of items found really highlights the need for us to design out waste and calls for the design industry to play a more integral role in the circular economy.”

Star plans to repeat the same exercise at another beach to see if there are any differences in materials that wash up. For now, you can see all 2041 pieces in Star’s short film, and when the typeface is released later this year, every single one of his pieces will be included, even if it’s only useful as ornamentation. In fact, Star’s most prized find wasn’t usable a letter at all. 
“One of my favorite pieces is the luggage label for ‘F A GARRETT, from Redbourn, Wentworth, Surrey. UK,’” he says. “So if you are reading this, ‘F A Garrett,’ and want it back, please get in touch.”