Can You Catch Your Own Football Pass 

Is this real or fake? I don’t know (yet). Of course I could catch my own pass if I threw the ball straight up, but what about this case? If you could do it like this, it would be pretty tough. Let’s see how possible this would be.
There are really only three things I can get from the video. I can get the time of flight for the football, the distance the ball is thrown and the delay time between the throw and the run. I can’t see the ball the whole time, so I can’t get an analysis of the ball. However, I can still use Tracker Video Analysis to get values for the time.
What do I find? First, the distance. I can just count the times he passes the lines spaced every 5 yards. This puts the distance from the throw to the catch at around 45 yards (it’s hard to see exactly where he catches the ball). He starts from the 35 yard line, crosses the 50 and runs to just around the 20 yard line.
After he throws the ball, he doesn’t take his first running step until after 0.542 seconds have passed. The total time of flight for the football is 5.797 seconds.
Ok, let’s do a quick check. Is this a reasonable time? Here is the first youtube hit for a 45 yard pass. Assuming this video is real, I get a time of flight of 2.434 seconds. Yes, I know. You can throw the ball many different ways to get a distance of 45 yards. Let’s try one more pass. This one has a flight time of 2.535 seconds. Both of these have much shorter times than the one in the video.  That doesn’t mean it’s fake – just not a “normal” pass.
When a player throws a football, there are only two forces acting on the ball after it leaves the hands. There is the gravitational force pulling the ball down and then there is the air resistance pushing in the opposite direction as the ball’s motion. For now, let me just assume that the air resistance is small enough to ignore. Really, this isn’t a terrible assumption. However, let’s check. I’ve looked at this a long time ago, so let me just show one plot. This is the trajectory of a football both with and without air resistance for about a 40 yard pass.
Yes, there is a difference in the two plots – but not a huge difference.
Now, suppose I throw this ball and it travels 45 yards (41.1 m). How would I do this? Well, I could throw it at super fast speeds and a low angle, or I could throw it at a higher angle and at a lower speed. For now, I will just say that I throw the ball at some angle θ with some initial speed v.
I can write an expression for both the vertical and horizontal motion of the ball. In the vertical motion, there is a constant acceleration of g and the final vertical velocity is the opposite of the initial vertical velocity. I can write that as:

In the x-direction, there is a constant velocity. If I assume the ball starts at the origin, then I can write:

I want to use these two equations to find a relationship between starting velocity and time of flight (for a given value of x). You probably don’t want to see all the details, but I worked it out in my little notebook.
That got a little crazy, but at least I have a relationship between time of flight and starting velocity. So, let’s say I want to throw the ball 45 yards. Here the starting velocities I could throw it at along with the time it would take to get there.
From this, you can see that in order to get a time of 5.797 seconds, you would need to throw it with an initial velocity of 29 m/s (65 mph). That seems a bit fast for a football, but let me first show this plot of different trajectories that all go the same distance (just for fun).
But wait! If you throw a ball with a speed of 29 m/s (and at an angle of 75.7°), would air resistance still be negligible? Probably not. If I rerun the trajectory plot both with and without air resistance, the ball with air takes 5.51 seconds and only goes 36.3 meters (39 yards). How fast would you have to throw it to get to the correct distance (with air resistance). This is actually a pretty interesting problem. I will leave it as a homework assignment. Find the speed and angle to throw a football such that it travels 45 yards and takes 5.797 seconds.
Can you throw a football this fast? I know I can’t – but what about a top athlete? Even though baseball and football are different, I think this will serve as a useful comparison. Let’s just say that both a baseball pitcher and a quarterback have similar throwing motions. They can exert the same force on the ball over the same distance. This would mean that they both do the same amount of work on their respective balls (stop – you konw what I mean) such that the football and baseball would have the same kinetic energy. Of course, a baseball has a lower mass than football so it goes faster. Right?
A MLB pitcher can throw a ball with a mass of 0.145 kg at 100 mph (44.7 m/s). This would give it a kinetic energy of 114.9 Joules. If a football (mass of 0.42 kg) has the same kinetic energy, it would have a speed of 58.6 mph (26.3 m/s). The 29 m/s football would be 20% more energy than a super fast baseball. That’s pretty high, but I wouldn’t say it’s impossible.
So, is it fake? I am going to say “probably”. If this guy could throw a football that fast, wouldn’t he make an excellent quarterback? He can run too so, that would make him the ideal quarterback. Oh, also you can’t see the ball the whole time. This doesn’t mean it’s fake just that it would be easier to make a fake video.
Everyone can do this trick themselves, right? Just throw the ball straight up and catch it. It’s simple. The stunt gets difficult when you throw the ball at a lower angle. A lower angle both decreases the time the ball is in the air as well as making the ball land farther away. So, for a certain launch speed, there is a minimum running speed you would need to catch your own ball.
I’m not going to completely solve this problem, but I am going to get you started on it. First, some assumptions.
Regarding running humans. I am going to base my running model off this article that looks at the speed of Usian Bolt. Just looking at his motion, he mostly accelerates at a constant acceleration until reaching a maximum speed. What would this value of acceleration be? Well, if the human has a max speed of vh and accelerates from rest then I could write:

I am using ta as the time of acceleration (3 seconds). This means that I can write the position of the runner during three time intervals. During time interval 1, the runner is stationary and waiting. During time interval 2, the runner is accelerating. During time interval 3, the runner is at a constant speed.

Since I know the football range as a function of launch angle as well as the time, I can figure out how fast you would have to run to get to that same location.
If I start with a ball launch speed of 18 m/s and throw it straight up, it will be in the air for 3.67 seconds. This means that for just about all of the throws, the runner will be accelerating the whole time and I can just use the second position function above (even if not exactly true, it will be close). However, this means that I will solve for the minimum human running acceleration instead of the max speed. Now if I pick a particular throwing angle, I can find both the range and the time. Using both of these I can plug into the second human position function and solve for the acceleration. Fun, right?
I will skip all the details, but here is a plot of solutions (actually with launch speeds other than just 18 m/s).
Look back at the paper showing data for Usain Bolt. I think an acceleration of 5 m/s2 is quite generous for a fit human. In that case, the human would have to throw the ball at about an 85° angle to catch it. Yes, that’s pretty close to just throwing it straight up.
A big Hat Tip to @MaxMathForum and others on twitter for bringing this cool video to my attention:
Who has physics/math students that can analyze this: is this real? Can you catch your own pass? https://t.co/JWYzoNPS0t #mathchat #anyqs
— Max Ray (@maxmathforum) April 28, 2014
 
Homepage photo: Torsten Bolten via Wikimedia Commons