Could a Hotel Bring Back Los Angeles’ Theater Row? 



In the heart of downtown Los Angeles, hiding in plain sight, some of the city’s most unique architectural treasures are gathering dust. The Roxie, the Tower, the Million Dollar, the Palace: these and dozens of other historic theaters have fallen far since their 1920s and ‘30s heydays, as money and glamor fled to the city’s ever expanding suburbs.
But now, the theaters’ fates appear to be turning around, having bounced off rock bottom and ridden (and contributed to) a wave of revitalization in the heart of the country’s second largest city. Perhaps the most promising re-launch is the United Artists Theater, which has been incorporated into the recently opened Ace Hotel.

The Ace group is internationally renowned for its locally sourced design consciousness. Partner Kelly Sawdon explains the Ace has been looking at Los Angeles as a site ripe for expansion for years, but the development opportunities never quite materialized. “Often times we’re looking at office buildings or older structures that aren’t currently hotels,” she notes. There are many false starts because of “zoning issues, or the developer doesn’t get the building. For us it ultimately comes down to the look and feel of the building, the neighborhood, and the fact that we have to be excited about it.” The addition of the UA Theater – a richly historic structure with strong links to the city’s entertainment industry DNA – sealed the deal, giving the company a distinctive foothold in LA rooted to local character.
The theater is a Gothic revival cave, dripping with Gaudi-esque stone flourishes. It was built in 1927 by a trio of united artists – Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks, and Charlie Chaplin – who joined forces to take on the film studios in the dissemination of their artistic endeavors. This creation myth is told in melodramatic allegory by murals lining the theater’s interior walls.
“We see it as a platform to engage the creative community in LA,” says Sawdon. “There are a lot of different creative classes in LA that you don’t always find in other cities, and that makes for a lot of opportunities here that are unique.”
One such distinctive troupe was on display as the theater’s dance repertory launched in late February with three performances from the LA Dance Project. Benjamin Millepied’s company offered bold – at times discomfiting – vignettes that incorporated music and stage art from other LA art scene luminaries. Future bookings will entail other dance shows as well as film nights, movie premieres, concerts, product launches, and private events.
Ace is embracing the role of revitalization early actor. “Being just slightly out of the main core area is something we’re used to doing,” says Sawdon. “We like helping build neighborhoods, we like the opportunities that allows us.” There are already signs that the intersection of 9th and Broadway is going upscale, as a number of Ace’s traditional “retail friends” have set up shop.
From the hotel’s rooftop lounge / restaurant “Upstairs”, Broadway extends northward, a shadowed canyon punctuated with repurposed theaters whose grand lobbies and stages sit dark and empty. But the United Artists marquee is aglow, a welcome sight in this neighborhood that has seen better days. “The artists have often been the ones driving the creative vision of this city,” notes Sawdon, “and we hope that this theater is treated the same way – artist driven and focused on how we can be a part of the fabric of the city.”