EU Rules That Google Must Honor Your ‘Right to be Forgotten’ 


Google and other internet search engines face a new world where they must remove links to websites containing certain types of personal data when individuals ask them to do so. The European Union says you have a right to be forgotten.
On Tuesday, the Court of Justice of the European Union ruled that Google must comply with the EU Data Protection Directive, even if much of its data processing occurs in other countries. That means that Google will be required to remove links, as requested by individuals, under certain circumstances, such as when the linked pages include inaccurate or illegally acquired information. Exactly how the deletion request process will work is yet to be determined, raising questions over whether the new ruling can actually be enforced.
The decision is typical of the EU, which has always taken a harder line on privacy than the U.S. But data privacy is a now growing concern in the U.S as well. Last year, the Senate investigative committee issued a report that looked at privacy concerns in the data brokerage industry, and this year, the White House published its much anticipated report on big data and privacy. As we debate our own policy solutions to privacy problems, we should watch how similar policies play out in Europe.
The decision is the result of a lawsuit filed against Google in 2010 on behalf of a Spanish man named Costeja González, who wanted Google to remove links to newspaper articles about an estate sale held in 1998 to cover social security debts he owed at the time. González argued that because the information was outdated–his debts have long since been settled–both the paper and Google were in violation of the Data Protection Directive.
The EU’s Data Protection Directive is designed to protect “information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person,” and it defines an “identifiable person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more factors specific to his physical, physiological, mental, economic, cultural or social identity.” This can include physical addresses, credit card numbers, religious affiliations and much more. When companies gather personal data, they must disclose to the person in question how the data will be used.
The directive also allows the person to demand the “rectification, erasure or blocking” of data that is incomplete, inaccurate, or otherwise does not comply with the rules layed out by the directive. In this case, the court determined that the estate sale information that Google linked to was outdated and should be removed. Oddly, the court determined that the newspaper could leave the articles online.
The decision says that a company may have to remove legally collected data in situations in which the data becomes outdated or inaccurate, even if that information was accurate when it was first published. It also establishes that linking to personal information from a search results page constitutes publishing personal information. “Without the search engine, the information could not have been interconnected or could have been only with great difficulty,” the court stated.
This interpretation of the law could create serious issues when it comes to enforcing the new ruling. First of all, there’s the “Streisand Effect”–the idea that trying to have information removed from the internet backfires by drawing attention to that content. In suing Google, González drew far more attention to the 1998 estate sale than it ever would have received otherwise.
But this is probably the least of the case’s problems. Since the law is now settled, removal requests could be quietly submitted to Google and other companies and only publicized in cases during which there is a dispute over whether certain links actually need to be removed. And those disputes are where the real problems may lay. It may not always be straightforward to determine which data is incomplete, inaccurate, or outdated and which is simply embarrassing.
It’s also possible that politicians or other public figures could try to use the ruling to have embarrassing facts about them removed from the web. The court is aware of this particular concern, and it calls for decisions to be made “according to the role played by the data subject in public life.” But the process for determining the correct balance between individual privacy and the public’s right to know isn’t described in the ruling.
The other issue is that pages contain inaccurate personal data may also contain other relevant information that should not be suppressed, or that individuals could file fraudulent claims requesting the removal of content they simply want to see removed from the web.
The U.S. has will have to confront similar issues soon. This month, Arizona passed a law criminalizing against so-called “revenge porn” and other non-consensual pornography, and other states including Utah and Wisconsin have passed similar bills. Much like the EU’s data privacy laws, these laws must balance the right to privacy with freedom of speech.