Fantastically Wrong: When People Thought Lambs Grew Right Out of the Ground 


They say that money doesn’t grow on trees, but technically it does grow on a plant. Our greenbacks, you see, are 75 percent cotton. If you haven’t actually seen a cotton plant before, here’s how it works. It’s a remarkable little shrub, with a bundle of leaves at its base and a long stem shooting skyward. And at the top of this stem is a lamb, which swings around hopelessly like a furry tetherball.

Or so goes the story of the bizarre Vegetable Lamb of Tartary. Also known as the barometz, derived from the Tartar word for lamb, this was a useful little creature that Europeans in the Middle Ages–aware that cotton was a thing that arrived from India, yet unaware exactly how it grew–decided was the source of their newfangled threads.
According to 19th-century naturalist Henry Lee, who penned an exhaustive 60-page treatise on the history of the vegetable lamb, in Europe this legend “met with almost universal credence from the thirteenth to the seventeenth centuries.” Its source, it seems, was the Middle Ages’ most famous traveler, Sir John Mandeville, whose fantastical accounts of his roamings abroad in the 1300s led to no small number of misconceptions back in England.
Mandeville writes in Middle English, so I’ll go ahead and just paraphrase for you: In Tartary (what is now Russia and Mongolia), there grows a plant that produces gourds, and from these issue forth tiny lambs, which men eat. Mandeville, who likely made up a good chunk of his travels and pulled from reference material instead, wrote that in his experience, they are quite delicious. So based on vegetable lambs not actually existing, we can confirm that Mandeville was somewhat of a liar. (Jorge Luis Borges, in his Book of Imaginary Beings, refers to him hilariously as “the problematic Sir John Mandeville.”)
Two variations of the barometz myth circulated in the Middle Ages. The first was that the plant bore many different pods, which burst open to reveal tiny lambs. That morphed into a second telling that accounted for the critter’s, you know, need to eat. So it became a single lamb set upon the top of the plant, bending down periodically on the flexible stem to graze on the vegetation surrounding it. It would die once it ran out of food within reach, that is, if its sole enemy other than humans, the wolf, didn’t get to it first.
Leave it to the Renaissance, though, to begin the process of unraveling the fable of the vegetable lamb. The great Italian polymath Girolamo Cardano pointed out in 1557 that soil could not provide the requisite heat for the lamb to survive, especially during its embryonic development, which may go down in history as the most overly sophisticated argument against an overly silly belief ever (honorable mention: when that lady had to debunk a CNN anchor’s assertion that a black hole could swallow a missing plane). Yet several more writers over the next century and a half insisted they glimpsed the strange animal-plant in their travels. And even without a shred of real evidence, even in the era of unprecedented proliferation of scientific learning, the tale persisted.
It wasn’t until the late 1600s that the barometz myth began to really fall apart, when Sir Hans Sloane presented London’s famed Royal Society with a plant procured from China. The specimen was a foot long, with seven protuberances, and covered in a sort of down. It seemed, said Sloane, “to be shaped by art to imitate a lamb, the roots or climbing parts being made to resemble the body, and the extant foot-stalks the legs.”
It was a fern rhizome, a structure equivalent to the stem of flowering plants, manipulated to look like an animal. And it was rhizomes like this, Sloane argued, that gave rise to the myth. A fine bit of evidence against the absurdity of the vegetable lamb tale, to be sure, but learned men traveling in Tartary still stubbornly took it upon themselves to further search for the creature.
That is, until another scientist presented a second specimen to the Royal Society 25 years after the first. But this one was far more gussied up. One of the “legs” had been tacked on, as had the “head” of the lamb, making it a freakish concoction not unlike P. T. Barnum’s Fiji mermaid, or the great American jackalope (a subject for another week) in the centuries that followed.
Problem was, this species of fern, which appropriately enough now bears the name Cibotium barometz, wasn’t native to Tartary. Instead, it grows in tropical southern China. But in the eyes of the scientific community, the mystery was solved. The myth had simply arisen from overactive imaginations and faked specimens, and probably a fair number of wine binges on the trade routes, to be quite honest.
Yet it wasn’t actually forgeries like those presented to the Royal Society that were to blame for the legend of vegetable lamb. This had been a large-scale comedy of errors, thousands of years and thousands of miles in the making.
It likely began with the ancient Greeks, who during their forays into India were introduced to cotton, or “trees that bear wool,” according to the historian Ctesias. Another historian, Herodotus, describes the king of Egypt sending a garment “ornamented with gold and fleeces from the trees,” perhaps a reference to the golden fleece of legend, a symbol of power–only without all those uppity skeletons swinging swords at you.
The Greeks never mentioned anything about lambs growing from trees. One writer, though, described the cotton pod as a melon, which in ancient Greek can also be translated as “goat” or “sheep.” It could well be, argues Lee in his history of the vegetable lamb, that medieval translators made this mistake. Sir John Mandeville may have picked up the mistranslation.
And imagine, if you will, being a European in the centuries of increasing contact with the East after the long economic isolation that followed the fall of the Roman Empire. Your clothes are made of wool, shorn off a sheep. Along comes a trader with a load of cotton, and tells you that in the East this kind of wool in fact grows on plants. In an overly credulous time of scant education and increasing wonder with entirely new worlds, it wasn’t altogether unreasonable for folks to assume that lambs in Tartary grew straight out of the ground.
It was the gathering might of scientific inquiry, though, that eventually killed the barometz. And today, strangely enough, science is revealing other real plant-like critters. Take, for instance, the green sea slug, which has acquired the genes necessary to produce its own chlorophyll, just like a plant.
Yet of course the vegetable lamb was never meant to be. After all, Mary needed a little lamb that was sure to follow her, not a lamb that could only bend slightly toward her before slowly dying of starvation. Doesn’t have quite the same ring to it, really.
Reference:
Lee, H. (1887) The Vegetable Lamb of Tartary: A Curious Fable of the Cotton Plant. Sampson Low, Marston, Searle, and Rivington.