Here’s How to Delete Comments and Correct Typos on Instagram 


Yes, you can delete comments in Instagram. Judging by the amount of comment spam, “follow me” begs, and typo self-shaming I see on a daily basis, its clear to me that most people don’t know this.
It’s remarkably easy to delete any comment on any picture or video you’ve posted. That includes any comment another user has left on your photo, or any comment or caption you’ve added beneath your photo. You can also delete any comment you yourself have left on somebody else’s photo.
You know the scenario. Some moron hashtag-bombs your picture. Delete! Or a friend leaves a comment thinking he’s being funny, but really, he’s just being a tasteless goon. Zap it! Or you’re leaving a comment on somebody else’s picture that actually is funny (omg your soo funny!) but then you hit Send before realizing auto-correct messed up one of the words, and thus, your joke. So you leave another comment noting the fix. Oh, but auto-correct munges that one too, so you leave a third comment. Enough! Delete, re-type, double-check, and make it look like you nailed the landing on the first try instead of fumbling around like a fool. No one will be the wiser.
Here’s how it’s done:
On iPhone, tap the “Comment” button beneath the photo. Swipe left over the offending comment. Tap the trash can and choose “Delete.” If somebody is using abusive language or harassing you, choose “Delete &amp; Report Abuse.” (Also, see that little arrow next to the trash can? Tap that to initiate an in-line reply.) 
On Android, tap the little speech bubble beneath the photo like you’re leaving a new comment. Tap and hold on the stupid comment. Choose either Delete or Delete and Report Abuse.
The Windows Phone app for Instagram does not yet offer the ability to delete comments. But! You can still do it in the web interface. Go to your Instagram page (it’s instagram.com/username) and log in. Find the photo in question and hover the pointer over the filthy comment. You’ll see a small [x] appear next to it. Click that and choose “Delete.”