How Facebook Could Actually Give You Anonymity 


Facebook wants to give you anonymity.
At least, that’s the word from Recode, which says the social network is in talks about a partnership with Secret, the app that lets you anonymously share gossip and other chatter.
At first blush, the two companies sound like strange bedfellows. After all, Facebook has always required the use of real names and identities, and Mark Zuckerberg has long said that the company is on a mission to make the world more “open,” not provide ways of keeping things hidden. But both Facebook and its users could benefit from this change in tack. Judging from the use of apps like Secret and others, part of the population is certainly drawn towards Secret-like anonymity, and more than any other operation on the net, Facebook wants to run a service that can be everything to everyone. 
Such a partnership may be especially appealing to teenagers, and that’s someone Facebook has a particular interest in reaching. With parents hovering around their Facebook accounts, teens have retreated to more private types of sharing, including texting services like WhatsApp and ephemeral messaging apps like Snapchat, and the new wave of anonymity apps — including Whisper and Yik Yak as well as Secret — have similar appeal. Unlike Facebook, these services don’t serve as a permanent record of what you’ve done online. On many, teens can pick a temporary handle one day and abandon in the next. Some systems, like Snapchat, even destroy old content as a matter of course.
According to social networking researcher Danah Boyd, who just released a book on teen social networking, teenagers aren’t draw to anonymity apps any more than adults, but they are drawn to opportunities to socialize without parental surveillance. “Teens are looking for a place of their own,” she says. “At the end of the day, Facebook is trying to be useful for everyone. And many teens simply don’t want to hang out in the same space as their parents.” 
All that said, it’s unclear how a Facebook-Secret partnership would actually work, and there are hurdles. For revenue, Facebook depends on knowing everything about its users in order to target them with online ads. And for users, it depends on preserving often fragile ties between far-flung relatives and old school chums. Anonymous posts would seem to undermine the company’s advertising ambitions, and the sort of defamatory and vicious talk that often crops up on Secret — which lets people namelessly send messages to other Secret users in their smartphone address books — will alienate some users. The trick would be to make anonymity just a small part of the company’s vast offerings.
That’s why a partnership makes some sense. Yes, Facebook could simply clone Secret, adding a simple messaging tool that hides your identity. This would work like a normal Facebook share, sending a status update out to all your friends with the usual attachments — photos, links, etc. — only without your name on it. But this could implode people’s most important relationships. People have used Secret to spread allegations of marital infidelity, complete with names, and complaints about specific people’s hygiene. Stuff like that is not going to make people want to come back to Facebook. It’s not fun.

To further encourage some baseline of civility, Facebook could mandate quasi-anonymous handles. No one would know who posted a given message, but they could see that the same user — “grumpybowler42″ or whatever — posted certain messages. This would give each user an investment in his or her identity, albeit a small one, to discourage trolling. This sort of thing isn’t very Facebooky. But that’s the point.
Would teens actually use Secret through Facebook? Who knows. “Frankly, the popularity of particular services is never that predictable,” Boyd says. “It’s not simply about the features. Facebook has implemented many features that were popular in other services that had no traction within its site because it didn’t fit with people’s mental model of the site.” But she adds that Facebook has a lot of room to experiment with things that might work, and you can bet the company will. Facebook may be the very antithesis of anonymity today, but it’s always looking to expand its reach. If it can spend $2 billion on the possibility of a social networking virtual reality, it can explore secrets too.