How Greed Almost Sabotaged the Smartphone Kill Switch 


About one third of robberies in major cities across the country involve the theft of a mobile phone, according to the Federal Communications Commission. In 2012 alone, lost and stolen phones cost consumers around $30 billion. So when some of the country’s biggest wireless carriers and smartphone manufacturers pledged this week to include anti-theft technology in their phones beginning in 2015, the promise seemed like a major step in the right direction. 
But what took them so long?
For years now, elected officials across the country have been calling for a mandatory “kill switch” in smartphones that would make phones completely inoperable if stolen. The hope is that if stolen phones can’t be reused or sold, then smartphone-toting consumers won’t be such appealing targets. Apple, for one, has already included its own “activation lock” in its iOS 7 software, while Samsung has reportedly been planning a similar type of technology since 2013. 
So why has the industry at large remained so stubbornly resistant to what seems a relatively simple way to protect consumers and combat crime? The answer, as always, is money.
Stolen phones drive two revenue streams for carriers. The secondary market of inexpensive phones means more people can sign up for wireless plans, while the threat of theft scares people into signing up for the carrier’s insurance plan. So while manufacturers like Apple and Samsung may lose market share to cheap stolen phones, their efforts to install kill switches have, until now, been shot down by carriers.
Last year, for instance, leaked emails between Samsung and several carriers showed that the Korean electronics giant had pre-installed kill-switch software in its phones, but carriers demanded it be removed. 
At the time, San Francisco District Attorney George Gascón told The Associated Press, “These emails suggest that the carriers are rejecting a technological solution so they can continue to shake down their customers for billions of dollars in (theft) insurance premiums…I’m incensed. … This is a solution that has the potential to end the victimization of their customers.”
Of course, carriers have never admitted to killing the kill switch. The wireless industry’s trade group, CTIA – The Wireless Association, has pushed back against the kill switch until now by claiming such a tool could be easily manipulated by hackers, allowing them to disable phones without users’ permission. 
In a statement announcing the pledge, CTIA president and CEO Steve Largent said, “It’s important different technologies are available so that a ‘trap door’ isn’t created that could be exploited by hackers and criminals.”
While that concern is very real, few are in a better position to tackle those security issues than companies like Apple or Verizon. 
As it stands now, Apple, Google, HTC, Huawei, Motorola, Microsoft, Nokia, and Samsung have all taken the pledge, as have Sprint, T-Mobile, U.S. Cellular, and Verizon. If they follow through, all new smartphones made and distributed by these companies after July 2015 will have a kill switch that allows users to wipe their data and disable their phones remotely if stolen. 
“This flexibility provides consumers with access to the best features and apps that fit their unique needs while protecting their smartphones and the valuable information they contain,” Largent said. 
Safety proponents say even this is not enough, arguing that consumers will still have to opt-in to turn the kill switch technology on. To truly safeguard consumers, they say, this technology ought to be a default setting on every phone.
“The wireless industry today has taken an incremental yet inadequate step to address the epidemic of smartphone theft,” California state senator Mark Leno said in a statement. 
However kill switches are ultimately put in place, the present-day reality remains the same: You’re carrying a sleek super-computer in your pocket worth hundreds of bucks. For now, the most secure thing you can do is keep it there.