Joss Whedon’s New Film Isn’t in Theaters, But You Can Watch It Online for $5 


Joss Whedon is the new Beyoncé.
OK, maybe he doesn’t have the moves or voice of Mrs. Carter (who else does?), but Whedon has followed the example of the one-time Sasha Fierce by releasing his new movie online with very little fanfare ahead of time. In Your Eyes, written and produced by Whedon and directed by Brin Hill, may be the second feature from Whedon’s Bellwether Pictures after 2012′s Much Ado About Nothing, but it’s the first to fully take advantage of Whedon’s stated intent of exploring ways to release material directly to the audience, bypassing traditional distribution methods.
Whedon announced the movie’s online release—it’s available for $5 on Vimeo here—in a video made to accompany the film’s official debut at the 2014 Tribeca Film Festival last night. “It’s a very exciting night for us, because it’s not just the premiere of the film, it’s the worldwide release date,” he explained from the set of Avengers: Age of Ultron. “This is exciting for us because it means we get to explore yet another new form of distribution, and we get five dollars,” he joked.
This isn’t entirely uncharted territory for Whedon, of course. His 2008 web series Dr. Horrible’s Sing-Along Blog eschewed traditional television or movie distribution in favor of an online release and went on to attract scores of fans and more than a few awards, including a Hugo, an Emmy, and a People’s Choice Award, with the latter being given for being the “best internet phenomenon” of the year. Of course, In Your Eyes isn’t exactly the same thing—it’s a full length movie, and not being released online for free with paid versions to follow like Dr. Horrible’s—but it’s definitely in the same online, straight-to-the-fans ballpark.
The film, shot in 2012, features Zoe Kazan and Michael Stahl-David as two strangers on other sides of the U.S. who are nonetheless able to sense what the other is feeling, and the relationship that this creates between them. It’s already getting positive reviews following its Tribeca screening, and so far those who have rented it seem pleased—or at least sound like they don’t feel cheated out of five bucks.  
Watch the first few moments of In Your Eyes below, then head here to check it out for yourself. 
