Mad Men Recap: Everyone Has a Problem With Authority 


Every week, WIRED takes a look at the latest episode of Mad Men through the lens of the latest media campaign of advertising agency Sterling Cooper &amp; Partners.
“You’re a bunch of flag-burning snots. You’ve got a thing to learn about patriotism and loyalty. The very fabric of Scout’s Honor is a joke to you.”—Lou Avery
“I mean, first the kids start off protesting, and the next thing you know every authority is up for grabs.”—Betty Francis
“We don’t turn on our friends as easily as you do.”—Les from Phillip Morris
He may be the head of Creative, running roughshod over the rest of the writers (Don included), but Lou Avery sees himself as the underdog. Specifically, he sees himself as a potential creator of Underdog, the cartoon about a anthropomorphic mutt superhero made by a Mad Ave. ad man much like himself. Yet Lou’s “ridiculous dream” that “people laughed at,” as he humblebrags, is Scout’s Honor, a military-themed comic strip that celebrates those squarest of virtues, “patriotism and loyalty.” Yes, a wealthy and powerful advertising executive writing and drawing a tribute to the mightiest fighting force in the history of humankind sees himself as a scrappy visionary, an overlooked genius whose worth has yet to be recognized—the Bob Dylan of the funny pages.
This paradoxical attitude goes a long way to explaining the political climate of 1969. It was, after all, the year Richard Nixon took office on the votes of a fantastically privileged white middle class that sincerely believed a ravening horde of hippies (who couldn’t afford showers) and black people (who were all but held prisoner in their decaying neighborhoods by politicians and police) were stealing the country from them. And it’s equally useful in examining “The Runaways,” a Mad Men episode with an unrelenting focus on authority—who has it, who wants it, who wants to defy it, and who believes they’ve lost it.
Take the episode’s central clash of the titans, Don vs. Lou. “This is an office made out of people who have problems with authority,” Don tells his boss, trying his best to do the dude a solid despite their differences (although copping an attitude of expertise is probably fun for Don in and of itself). Lou rejects the advice outright, insisting Don stay late (“I’m going to tuck you in tonight”), then not even looking at the work he’s forced him to do. To Lou, being the boss is no use unless you’re actively bossing people around.
You see a similar dynamic at play in the Henry and Betty Francis household. If I were Stan Rizzo, who’s got an imaginary Dr. Freud on call at all times, I’d likely diagnose Betty as borderline—she sees love as suspect and disappointment as validation that she’s right to suspect it. Bobby’s perpetual stomachache and Sally’s treatment of the Francis home as a prison to be escaped (man, was their bedside conversation crushing!) are the result. But they’re just kids, unable to avoid the dynamic created for them by their mom. Henry, a grown-ass man, ought to know better than to react to Betty’s provocations, but also reject her apologies (which she’s showing tremendous strength and courage even to offer) and add to her embarrassment by berating her. He’s set up a war of wills neither one can win—indicative, perhaps, of the lack of political spine he shows by following Nixon’s war prevarications all over the map.
The current Mrs. Draper is facing an opposite predicament. While Henry orders Betty to “leave the thinking to me,” Don gives Megan too much freedom, maintaining a separate life on an opposite coast. The couple’s still trying their best to work things out, but with precious little oversight or impact on one another’s lives, they wind up trying to exert influence at indirect angles. Troubled by Don’s relationship with his “niece” Stephanie—her beauty, Don’s willingness to drop everything to help her—Megan pays her off and sends her on her way, phrasing her argument almost exclusively in terms of  how her disorganized lifestyle will rub alpha-male Don the wrong way. 
Yet it’s Megan who fulfills her own prophecy. Her swingin’ party is a zoobie-zoobie-zoo too far for Don, who’d rather spend time with Harry freaking Crane than stick around. What does she do to get back in Don’s good graces? Like Lou, she takes command of Don’s night, even echoing his words by ordering her friend Amy to “tuck you in” with a threesome so calculated that Don’s as much bemused as he is aroused. But this isn’t Betty’s idea of “wildness in the kids,” or Margaret/Marigold Sterling’s communal lifestyle—it’s an attempt to control, a means to an end and not an end in itself. Because of that, the sex ceases to be emotionally or erotically fulfilling when the control evaporates. Don fields another call from Stephanie, he leaves early for business, Amy scampers out of the apartment rather than stick around for awkward morning-after coffee, and Megan’s left alone in a bedroom she turned into an ersatz office. (To be fair, God knows Don’s turned the office into a bedroom a few times too many.)
At the episode’s conclusion, issues of loyalty and command come to a head not once but twice. After a tipoff from Harry, Don crashes Lou and Jim Cutler’s meeting with the aptly named Commander cigarette brand execs from tobacco giant Phillip Morris. If the firm gets the gig, Don, who famously tore the cigarette companies a new one in the pages of the New York Times, has gotta go. (Which is precisely the idea—there’s Lou’s loyalty for you!) So Don sells his services almost exclusively with the vocabulary of power: The government built a gallows for Big Tobacco but Don “stayed the execution,” and even though he betrayed the cigarette companies before, why not “force me into your service” and score a bigger victory over your rivals in government and business alike? A master of the language of authority, Don can wield it, reject it, fight it, and submit to it in a single sales pitch.
Michael Ginsberg is not so lucky. Throughout his brief but memorable time on this show, he’s reacted to his circumstances like a man on the verge of a nervous breakdown. Even before he went all Dave Bowman about SC&amp;P’s resident HAL-9000, he was shouting “I am become death!” about working in advertising at all. It came across like a neurotic quirk of ’60s  Jewish comedians he’s likely based on—at least until we learned he may have been born in a concentration camp. That is how Michael Ginsberg understands authority. And when a computer—the ultimate unfeeling embodiment of cold command—takes over his break room, Ginsberg breaks. So did a lot of people, when confronted with a society and a government indifferent to whether they lived or died. The very fabric of Scout’s Honor is more than a joke to them. It’s a joke on them.