Read This Before Zapping Your Brain 


Have you bought your transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) head-set yet? You’ve heard of this, right? It’s a device with electrodes that zap your brain through your skull, using mild electrical currents to make you smarter. The man in the picture above sports one of the first commercially available devices. Produced by Foc.us, it’s available for $249, and also comes in black. This technology is far from new – Roman physician Galen was on to something similar when he slapped electric fish on his patients’ heads. But tDCS is now in the process of going mainstream: there are DIY brain-zapping enthusiasts on YouTube; last year MTV editor Mary H K Choi wrote an amusing but inconclusive tDCS self-experimentation piece for Aeon; and just the other day, Oliver Burkeman included tDCS in his roundup of new brain-enhancing technologies for The Guardian.
The manufacturers claim that the tDCS headset will “overclock your brain”, increase your brain’s plasticity and “make your synapses fire faster”. Overclocking sounds a bit dangerous, and rather than your synapses, wouldn’t it be better to make your neurons fire faster? Synapses are the junctions between neurons. We usually say it’s neurons that “fire” and their message is passed across one or more synapses to other neurons using chemicals. Unless the marketing people were talking specifically about electrical synapses? But sorry, I’m rambling. Must focus. “Foc.us”. Need more electric current. Hang on …
Phew, better … To be fair to Foc.us, the idea of having faster synapses at the flick of switch sounds appealing, and, believe it or not, their claims for the brain-enhancing effects of tDCS are not entirely unfounded. In fact, almost each week there’s a new study claiming that tDCS can boost yet another aspect of mental function. Zapping different parts of the brain has been linked with superior learning of new motor skills; better math skills; better social skills; superior learning and memory; and on the list goes. tDCS is also being investigated as a treatment for a range of psychiatric and neurological problems, but for today let’s focus on mental enhancement for healthy people.
From a physiological perspective, tDCS affects brain function in two ways – by altering the baseline activity level of targeted neurons and by modifying functioning at synapses. The effect on neuron activity levels occurs while you zap; the synaptic influence is a longer-lasting after-effect. The specific changes depend on a whole range of factors, most obviously whether the current is positive (“anodal”), which increases neuronal activity, or negative (“cathodal”) which suppresses it. tDCS is not to be confused with electro-convulsive therapy (for severe depression and other conditions) in which a much higher current of electricity is used to deliberately induce a brain seizure.
So the brain changes triggered by tDCS are real. And there are those findings in peer-reviewed journals showing a range of appealing cognitive benefits. What’s not to like? Well, I confess I’m geeky enough to have compiled and read a number of cautionary science papers on tDCS published by experts over the last couple of years, and they certainly give pause for thought. Before you start revving up your grey matter with extra electricity, I suggest you bear in mind the following caveats and warnings:
Disclaimer: Despite possible appearances to the contrary, this post was written by an under-clocked brain that’s not yet been zapped by tDCS.