Stanford Whizzes Develop an Astoundingly Cheap Fix for Clubfoot 



In 2014, when you can monitor everything from sleep apnea to blood sugar with an iPhone app, the treatment for a common birth defect called clubfoot looks positively Dickensian. Clubfoot affects one in every thousand newborns and causes their feet to turn inwards, making it look like they’re walking on their ankles. Treatment can correct the condition in most cases, but post-operative physical therapy involves years of wearing an ugly, uncomfortable, and expensive “orthopedic brace” that consists of a pair of clumsy shoes separated by a steel shank.
The braces are designed to hold the patient’s feet in a specific position that strengthens muscles and helps the feet develop properly. While it’s hard to argue with the clinical outcomes, many braces are unstable, making walking nearly impossible, and the kids who wear them look like holdovers from a sad time when affliction by “bad humors” was a plausible medical diagnosis. Adding insult to injury, these thoroughly low-tech braces cost more than iPads, generally coming with a $300-700 price tag.
Fortunately, a pair of Stanford students named Jeff Yang and Ian Connolly have developed a modern solution that is equally functional, but costs $20 and is far less garish. Their colorful, injection molded brace locks the patient’s feet into a therapeutic position while the light plastic frame makes it possible for kids to stand and play on their own. People watching the kids bound around in their braces might even think that the device was a new toy.

The inventive aid was the result of a course on “extreme affordability” at Stanford’s D.School, an institution set up by IDEO veterans to inculcate students in design thinking methodologies. Administrators were approached by an organization called Miraclefeet that endeavors to treat clubfoot in the developing world that was looking for a low-cost product. Yang and Connolly stepped up to take on the challenge of developing a product that would give kids access to top-quality care without making them feel like science experiments.
Yang and Connolly visited Brazil to learn about how children with clubfoot were treated and left shocked by what they found. The tech seemed ancient in the U.S., but the local standard of care was abysmal. “Many of the lower-end braces are just literally curved aluminum rods,” says Yang. “Physicians will bend metal over the end of a chair while talking to the parents.” Unsurprisingly, the kids hated wearing the braces, and when they did, they often fell over due to the poor design.
After talking with physicians, parents, and representatives from Miraclefeet, the designers employed the standard D.School process—uncovering latent user needs through ethnographic fieldwork and bodging together prototypes to solicit feedback from stakeholders, resulting in a design that solves many of the key problems.
A simple improvement was allowing the shoes to detach from the brace using a custom cleat. This makes it easier for parents to slip the shoe on a crying toddler before attaching them to the apparatus. Detachable shoes also give children the dignity of wearing their own footwear rather than being forced to don smelly hand-me-downs that have seen 10 other feet.
Allowances like a wider base studded with rubber grommets make the brace more stable, giving kids the freedom to stand without assistance and walk around effortlessly. Surprisingly, this was a shocking concept for many of the Brazilian doctors they spoke with, who just assumed kids would lie immobile for 12 hours at a stretch while wearing the footwear.
Therapeutic guidelines call for very specific adjustments to the posture of the children’s feet, but when braces are being fabricated in exam rooms, aids can often be misaligned. Yang and Connolly’s injection molded solution brings consistency to the caregiving process. Old fabrication methods left room for error, but the new plastic brace always meets specifications.
Using plastics as a material also allowed the designers to experiment with aesthetics. “A lot of the braces are intimidating looking, cold looking,” says Connolly. “We wanted to develop something highly functional, elegant, but using same visual language as a child’s toy.”
The result is a brace that costs about $20, potentially making it a disruptive technology in the developing world and a potential game changer in the United States.
Before this brace becomes the standard of care, it will face challenges. In parts of Brazil, doctors often stay faithful to less effective solutions because they make more money delivering them. Also, instead of being adjustable like competitive braces, the molded nature of Yang and Connolly’s design means patients will have to buy a new brace as the child grows, adding cost. Despite these drawbacks, the concept has performed well in clinical studies. The designers plan to put it before the FDA, which would allow it to be sold in the U.S. The designers hope to get off on the right foot in 2014 and put over 15,000 units into circulation by the end of the year.