The Comics You Must Grab After Seeing The Amazing Spider-Man 2 


As this weekend’s The Amazing Spider-Man 2 has demonstrated, with great power—say, the powers to do whatever a spider can—comes great responsibility. And maybe more than a little tragedy, too. While the movie offered more than a few hints of where the franchise will go next, you might be looking for a few more details about what lies in store for the various inhabitants of Sony’s Spider-Movieverse. 
For that, the best guide may be a return to the source material itself: Marvel’s comic books. Spidey’s been swinging through the pages of multiple series from Marvel (and multiple realities, as well) for more than 50 years, so it’s unsurprising that there’s a whole heap of material out there to act as potential signposts towards the future of the cinematic wall-crawler. Here are some specific storylines to keep an eye out for. (Spoiler alert: There are few spoilers for Amazing Spider-Man 2 here, so proceed with caution.)  
Let’s be honest here: There aren’t that many “classic” Electro stories out there, despite the character having been running around since 1964′s The Amazing Spider-Man #9. This three-part storyline from 2009 by Mark Waid and Paul Azaceta bucks the “Electro Stories Suck” trend by giving the character a little political juice (pun intended) and placing him at the forefront of an Occupy-esque movement called Power to the People (that pun, also, was inevitably intended). Although his shenanigans turn him into a folk hero, things turn out to be more complicated than they’d seemed initially, leading to Spidey’s involvement. 
How to read it: Available digitally, as well as in the The Amazing Spider-Man: The Gauntlet, Book 1 print collection.
If you’re wondering where Harry Osborn’s time as the Green Goblin is likely to lead, this 1993 issue from J.M. DeMatteis and Sal Buscema is a good place to look. (Spoiler: It doesn’t end well for anyone involved, thereby fulfilling the “Everything in Spider-Man’s life will eventually go horribly wrong, even if you’re not Spider-Man” rule that has become part of the character’s mythology.) Underneath the melodrama of the story—it was the 1990s, that kind of thing was big then—there’s an attempt to paint a more nuanced picture of Osborn as someone who’s been particularly screwed up by his experiences with his father and hanging out with Peter Parker that makes it notable. Also worth noting: Thanks to the very comics-ness of it all, the end of this story was later undone, thereby undercutting the tragedy (and point) of the whole thing considerably. 
How to read it: Available digitally, and in back-issue bins as a single issue.
No, that’s not a typo; the 2003 series by Brian Michael Bendis and Trevor Hairsine about the formation of the Sinister Six actually ran seven issues, because … well, let’s just say that the story demanded it, shall we? Thanks to announcements from Sony, we know that a version of the super-team bound together with the one simple aim of squashing Spider-Man will be making an appearance in a future movie from The Cabin in the Woods director/co-writer Drew Goddard. This series offers a movie-centric line-up of characters that includes including Spider-Man, the Green Goblin, and Electro, with Harry Osborn playing an important role as well. As an added bonus, the Avengers show up (except, because this is a series that takes place in Marvel’s Ultimate Universe, they’re called the Ultimates, but really, it’s the Avengers).
How to read it: Available digitally, as well as in the Ultimate Spider-Man Vol. 9 print collection.
Of course, it’s possible that Sony might decide to go in a different direction with the whole “Sinister Six” concept, which makes this current Marvel series by Nick Spencer and Steve Lieber the go-to book. Its high concept is pretty simple: What if the Sinister Six was made up of losers who can’t quite get their act together? Funny, touching and a welcome subversion of the norm, if this is the inspiration for Goddard’s movie, I wouldn’t complain one bit. (Note: the series is still running; this is just the first storyline.)
How to read it: Available digitally, as well as in the Superior Foes of Spider-Man Vol. 1: Getting the Band Back Together print collection.
If Amazing Spider-Man 2 left you feeling like you’d want to see a little bit more of the Peter Parker/Gwen Stacy relationship, you’re probably not alone. This 2002 series by Jeph Loeb and Tim Sale focuses on the comic book incarnation of the romance between the two from start to tragic finish as retold by an older, wiser and just a little bit more melancholy Spider-Man. A surprisingly understated story from the traditionally-bombastic Loeb, with some lovely art from Tim Sale, an artist who has seemingly disappeared from the comic book scene in recent years.
How to read it: Available digitally, as well as in the Spider-Man: Blue print collection.
Another character we know will appear in a future movie thanks to a studio announcement is Venom. However, given what has already been set up in the Amazing Spider-Man movies about Peter Parker’s father, it’s a pretty safe bet to assume that the version of the character that will show up will bear more resemblance to the Ultimate Universe incarnation of the character than the “regular” Marvel Universe version. For one thing, the Ultimate Venom is partially the result of research carried out by Peter’s scientist father, instead of an alien costume that … oh God just thinking about this is reminding me of the Sam Raimi-directed Spider-Man 3 and I have to stop now. For another, the Venom technology plays a part in later resurrecting Gwen Stacy—you know, just in case anyone at Sony wants to bring Emma Stone back in the future for any reason. These two storylines by Brian Michael Bendis and artists Mark Bagley (#33-38) and Stuart Immonen (#123-128) introduce Venom and re-introduce Gwen, respectively, hinting at possibilities that the studio could easily pursue.
How to read them: Both storylines are available digitally, with #33-38 also available in the print collection Ultimate Spider-Man Vol. 6: Venom and #123-128 in the print collection Ultimate Spider-Man Vol. 21: War of the Symbiotes.