The 5 Comics You Have to Read This Month 


It’s not always easy figuring out what comics to read every month. So let’s keep it simple: If you’re only going to pick up a couple of titles, here’s a handful worth your time and money. (Some you can even buy online, saving both those things.) Since this is by definition only a tiny slice of the comics on the shelves, consider this a monthly sampler—and leave your own suggestions in the comments.
Yes, Saga is back. After four seemingly interminable months with absolutely no robot princes, cyclops novelists, ghost babysitters, or Lying Cats, the sci-fi space opera by Brian K. Vaughan and Fiona Staples is headed back where it belongs: in my goddamn hands. Since the comic debuted in 2012, Alana and Marko, two lovers from alien races on the opposite sides of a massive galactic war, have managed to fall in love, give birth to a daughter named Hazel, and pinball through space attracting the wrath of soldiers, spirits, bounty hunters and vengeful exes. 
Saga occupies a world that Vaughan (creator of Y: The Last Man and a former writer on Lost) has been building in his mind since childhood, and thanks to the gorgeous illustrations of the ferociously creative Staples, it feels just as expansive and fully-realized on the page. The Hugo Award-winning Saga is quite simply one of the best comics on the shelves, a deft, funny fantasy yarn that continues to delight and surprise. New to the series? Grab the first collection now in print or digital for ten bucks and even money says you’ll be ready to jump on the new arc by mid-May.
Price: $2.99Date: The fourth arc begins in Saga 19, out May 21Where to Buy It: Image Comics
The first image of Southern Bastards is a vivid one: a dog squatting by an Alabama highway littered with trash and religious signs, shitting slowly on the ground. If that description turns your stomach, then turn back now—this book isn’t for you. Southern Bastards is the homecoming tale of Earl Tubb, a middle-aged man who returns to the small town where he grew up and draws the ire of the neck-tattooed, Bible-thumping local thugs, thanks in part to the legacy of his father, a famous, long-dead sheriff. It’s no surprise that both writer Jason Aaron and artist Jason Latour hail from the South; there’s an intimacy to the way Southern Bastards moves through the streets of Craw County that draws the eye even—and especially—when it’s ugly. 
“I love the South,” says Aaron in the back matter of the debut issue. “The South also scares the living shit out of me … that’s what this book is about. About a place you love and hate and miss and fear all at the same time.” If that sounds like a place you’d like to visit, buy a ticket.
Price: Digital for $2.99, print for $3.50Date: First issue out now, second on May 28Where to Buy It: Image Comics
Andre Rousimoff, better known as Andre the Giant, found fame in the 1980s and ’90s as a professional wrestler (and as an actor in movies like The Princess Bride) thanks in large part to his massive seven-and-a-half-foot, 500-pound frame. Cartoonist Box Brown delves into the man behind the legend in this graphic novel about Rousimoff, from his early life as a teenager who literally didn’t fit on his school bus to the man who ultimately paid a very high price for the physique that made him famous, both physically and emotionally. Cameos from famous friends like Hulk Hogan and Billy Crystal (as well as Princess Bride co-stars Mandy Patinkin and Robin Wright) flesh out the occasionally tragic story of a man who became known the world over for his size but never quite found a space where he could truly fit in. “He lived in a cruel world,” says Hogan. “But if you really understood what he went through and what he was all about, he was a gracious person with a kind heart.”
Price: Kindle edition for $9.99, print for $17.99Date: May 6Where to Buy It: Macmillan Publishers 
Thanks to its precocious and occasionally mischievous young protagonist and charming, offbeat humor, Cul de Sac is often compared to Calvin and Hobbes. It’s a high compliment for any newspaper strip, but don’t mistake this for a Bill Watterson knockoff: Cul de Sac is a modern comics classic all its own, with quirks, laughs and an unforgettable protagonist in little Alice Otterloop. The only real drawback to Cul de Sac is how short a time we had with it; it ran from 2007 until 2012, when creator Richard Thompson retired to focus on his treatment for Parkinson’s Disease. But he has left us a strip that is worth remembering and treasuring, which is why it’s fantastic to see the entire run collected in the single two-volume collection The Complete Cul de Sac. It’s admittedly pricey at $75 (some online retailers may offer discounts), but anyone who has read and loved it—or anyone who bemoans the general downturn of the newspaper comics page—is likely to think it’s worth the price. 
Price: $75Date: May 6Where to Buy It: Amazon
Writer Mariko Tamaki and artist Jillian Tamaki team up for a slice-of-life graphic novel about a young girl named Rose Wallace, who goes to the same seaside cottage with her family each summer. But this year is different. Suddenly she feels too old to build forts, but still too young to hang out with the sexually-active, foul-mouthed local teenagers. 
Full of milkweed, clouds, and sand painted in long brushstrokes, the art evokes how languorous summer can feel, and how full of its own self-contained, slow-motion dramas. Rose spends half her time playing and eating candy just like she used to; the other half of the time she spends secretly watching “grown up” horror movies and trying to make sense of the fights between her parents—and a local teenage couple—whose adult-sized problems she can only partly understand. It’s an account of final, liminal summer between childhood and adolescence, and trying and make sense of the more mature and confusing world that lies ahead before finally stepping across the line.
Price: $17.99Date: May 6Where to Buy It: Macmillan Publishers 