The Must-Watch TV Moments You Missed This Week 


Inside Amy Schumer
Get More: Comedy Central,Funny Videos,Funny TV Shows
The entrée in this week’s television feast was obviously Game of Thrones, but we can’t let the delicious trimmings go unappreciated! House Lannister got served in King’s Landing. Amy Schumer and Josh Charles served witty banter and miscellaneous chicken parts to fast food customers, and the Portlandia brain trust had to trade in their bougie Oregon pinot for pizza and Jaegermeister. Oh, and we celebrated the 10th birthday of The Passion of the Christ with Billy on the Street. Happy 10 years, Passion! It seems like just yesterday we were debating the controversial nature of biblical tales brought to the screen and Mel Gibson’s place in Hollywood. Oh, wait—that was yesterday? When we were talking about Darren Aronofsky’s Noah and Mel Gibson’s forthcoming role in Expendables 3? Well, it looks like as much as things change, they stay the same! So here is your trusty WIRED TV recap. (Warning: There are Game of Thrones spoilers below.)
You don’t have to love Aaron Sorkin and his patented Sorkinese dialect to appreciate this send up of his hate-loved HBO show The Newsroom. In fact, it’s probably better if you’re over Aaron Sorkin all together and want to kidney punch him. Schumer and guest star Josh Charles are the Will and Mac of McDalmond’s, a fast food chain that’s basically going communist and phasing apple slices into its menu as a substitute for fries. But you can keep your damn produce. We prefer our Giggle Meals with a side of real America, please. 

In the alt-chic artisanal old timey bastion of weird that is Portlandia you can be anything you want to be. It’s a safe space for womyn, This American Life tailgaters, militant cyclists, appliqué enthusiasts and all other walks of life. But if you’re going to be gay, do you think you could be the right kind of gay? Like the kind that could decorate a house or give an edgy makeover? When Carrie’s brother comes to visit with his ultra bro-y boyfriend in tow, she and Fred realize that, even as model residents of utopian Portland, they’ve got a few things to learn about tolerance, understanding, and the unifying power of Jaeger Bombs.

Has it really been a decade since Mel Gibson let his Christian flag fly by writing, directing, and producing The Passion of the Christ? Well, it’s Billy Eichner’s favorite movie, and he’s hitting the streets to remind anyone who won’t slap him that Jim Caviezel died (on screen) for our sins 10 years ago this Easter. This segment was made possible by the passion of Billy Eichner and a really big pink bunny suit.

Based on the heel persona and constant smug expression—both of which he wears so well—it’s clear that Simon Cowell delights in being the curmudgeonly bastard archetype of competition-based reality TV, a format he’s practically responsible for inventing. Want a tall glass of Haterade? Simon’s got silos of it. Maybe his shoes are too tight.  Maybe his heart is two sizes too small. Bottom line: This is a man not easily moved. Enter octogenarian miracle Paddy Jones, a pocket-sized Brit who decided to shake up her life after the untimely passing of her husband by reigniting her passion for dance. Together with her instructor Nico Espinosa, Paddy salsa’d her way to viral status online, and national sweetheart status in the UK. Not even Cowell could withstand the inspirational Widow Jones! One minute in he red-buzzers the pair in the face, but by the end he’s grinning like a fool while hosts Ant and Dec leap around in the wings. Even if you don’t win, Paddy, you have earned your rightful place in the BGT Hall of Fame right alongside fellow late bloomer and Simon emotional kryptonite, Susan Boyle. 

WARNING: Don’t play this clip if you watch Game of Thrones and have somehow managed to avoid details about last week’s Purple Wedding because you’re waiting for—what?? What are you waiting for?! Go watch the most recent GoT right now, because your friends are just about tired of waiting on you to catch up! That said, if you’re part of the initiated, relive the royal wedding’s climatic moment over and over and over again with the clip above, and then check out WIRED’s weekly recap of the show for deep-cut analysis.

Hearing the head of an ancient tree being scream about “the unicorn rebellion of ’95″ and the irony and regret of being mounted to a wall on her own “stump of a corpse” is way more funny than it should be, considering this is a puppet ranting about its wasted life. This behind-the-scenes extra of voice performers from Creature Shop giving off-the-cuff monologues through fantastical taxidermied creature heads gives us so much Labyrinth nostalgia it’s going to take 300 spins of Magic Dance to get us right again. And it’ll do the same for you.