The Crazy Diversity of Animal Skulls, From Hippos to Hummingbirds 



You can tell a lot about the life an animal lived by looking at its skull. Big eye sockets point to a nocturnal lifestyle (big eyes harvest more light). Giant canine teeth indicate a taste for flesh. Lightweight bone riddled with air pockets is an adaptation for life on the wing. These features and many more are on display at a new exhibit, opening Friday at the California Academy of Sciences.
Visitors can see more than 640 skulls, from the 218-pound cranium of an African elephant, to the delicate skulls of tiny hummingbirds and shrews. If you go, you’re likely to see many of your favorite animals in a new light, from the surprisingly toothy hippopotamus to the surprisingly small platypus. Slow loris? Check. Anteater? You bet.
Many of the skulls come from a collection started by Ray Bandar, a retired biology teacher and lifelong collector. Bandar, who’s now 86 and retired from collecting, built up the collection by combing Northern California beaches and acquiring them from local zoos when animals died. He reportedly collected his first specimen–a harbor seal skull–in his 20s, taking it home to his parents’ house on public transportation.
The centerpiece of the exhibit is a collection of 400 sea lion skulls mounted on one wall. It represents just a sixth of the Academy’s collection of sea lion skulls, the largest in the world. “I love the sea lion wall,” said Moe Flannery, a collection manager in ornithology and mammalogy. “It gives you an idea of why as scientists we need lots of individuals of a species.” Variations in the skulls, she explains, reveal whether an animal was male or female, young or old, and in some cases how they died. Small round holes in the skull of one sea lion, for example, point to a shotgun wound, possibly at the hands of an angry fisherman.
The exhibit reveals human influences in other ways too. A case of dog skulls shows the effects of selective breeding. To the untrained eye, the chihuahua and pit bull look like they couldn’t possibly be the same species. And then there’s the pug. ”Their noses are so squished in,” Flannery said. With that anatomy, it’s no wonder they snort so much.
The exhibit’s interactive features include a giant touch screen that lets you zoom in and rotate virtual versions of several skulls for a closer look. Another clever exhibit shows you what an African savannah looks like through the eyes of a predator with forward facing eyes like ours, which are good for gauging distance (delicious antelope at 50 yards); or through the more lateral eyes of a prey animal, which sacrifices depth perception for a wider view of any potential dangers lurking in the grass.
And then there are the flesh eating beetles. Academy scientists use dermestid beetle larvae to help clean flesh of the skulls to prepare them for exhibit. The beetles are fast and thorough, and they are particularly useful for cleaning fragile specimens, Flannery explains. In one display case you can see them doing their gnarly work (you can also see them in the time lapse video below). If the beetles make you squeamish, there’s nothing to fear: They can’t escape, and even if they could, they aren’t interested in the flesh of the living.
