This Week’s Best Trailers: Chaos in Gotham and Khal Drogo on a Bike 

Television (and television stars) dominate this week’s trailers for two reasons: One, annual network upfronts start next week, so it’s prime time for previews; and two, because this week’s round of trailers for summer blockbusters-to-be amounted to 30-second TV spots, sneak peeks with little new footage, and trailers for trailers to come. Not to worry, though—while the movie pickings are slim, the TV trailers are knocking it out of the park.

FOX’s entry into the superhero genre delivered a one-two punch Monday, landing a full-season pickup and releasing this packed first trailer. It’s hard not to compare it to Christopher Nolan’s work—The Penguin’s “There is a war coming” speech sounds familiar—but the series’ preview has enough to set it apart: There are shots of iconic villains and the Wayne murders, as well as a scene where Ben McKenzie’s Jim Gordon pulls a Sandy Cohen (wink) and advises the orphaned Bruce Wayne.Pause at: 0:44. There’s your first look at Jada Pinkett Smith as Fish Mooney, an original villain who, according to FOX, is a “sadistic gangster boss and nightclub owner” with minions like The Penguin under her thumb. Check out her lair at 1:21 (see the neon pink sign?) and look to the left for campaign posters supporting Mayor Austin James (Richard Kind). It’s very nice to meet you, Big Bad of Gotham season one.

Okay, maybe the plot’s a little thin—Khal Drogo (fine, fine, Jason Momoa) plays Robert Wolf, a tough guy who rides his tough motorcycle and eludes the not-so-tough FBI—but the trailer is visually stunning. Just check out the scenery. Add in a rollicking tune, and it almost feels like a music video. Directed by Momoa and co-starring Sarah Shahi and Lisa Bonet (!), the film’s still traveling the festival circuit, but comes out on demand and on DVD in July.Pause at: 0:33. Desert landscape + single lightning bolt = perfection. It is known.Song: Radio Birds, “Ease My Mind”Honorable Mention: Also on the festival circuit is Bird People, a bilingual dramedy starring Josh Charles as a computer engineer trying to straighten out his life in an international hotel near Paris’ Roissy airport. 

AMC released another trailer for its upcoming show, which brings Mad Men-level period detail to the PC revolution of the early ’80s. This time, the network turns up the heat with a new tagline, along with footage showing Lee Pace looking determined to make computers (instead of pies) by deliberately stealing from IBM, Scoot McNairy trying to stop him, and Mackenzie Davis throwing lipstick in the sink.Pause at: 0:19. It might be impossible to decipher what she originally scrawled in lipstick on the mirror in that shot, but feel free to try.Song: Eurythmics, “Sweet Dreams (Are Made Of This)”

Another vampire satire? Pass. But wait, a vampire satire by the Flight of the Conchords guys? We’re all ears. Directed by Taika Waititi and Jemaine Clement, who also brought you 2007′s hilarious and tragically unknown Eagle vs. Shark, the mockumentary chronicles the misadventures of three vampires who, despite having lived together for centuries, still struggle to work in harmony.Pause at: 1:17. These vampires don’t sparkle; they do loop-de-loops and fly.Song: Leningrad, ” Lastochka”Honorable Mention: It’s hard to tell whether Melissa McCarthy’s newest vehicle Tammy will become the next The Heat or just the next Identity Thief, but the latest trailer offers a good look at Susan Sarandon and McCarthy’s banter. 

A simple dinner party turns into a terrifying… something. The indie sci-fi film, about a blackout caused by a comet passing near Earth, brings us a trailer that—despite its title—is completely incomprehensible. But that just makes it more intriguing.Pause at: 0:29. Look, it’s Max (Maury Sterling) from Homeland! Is he there to do some surveillance work?Honorable Mention: Here’s another teaser for FX’s The Strain, and beware—it’s just as gag-inducing as the previous ones we’ve seen. Hey, FX, can we please get a full trailer already? You’re having way too much fun with these.