Watch: How Andy Warhol’s Lost Computer Art Was Finally Found 


Back in the 1980s, computer makers were scrambling to get Andy Warhol to try out their spiffy new graphic software. Among them was Steve Jobs, who had been pestering Warhol to play with MacPaint, initially to a lukewarm response. “Jobs wanted Andy to use the Mac, but he didn’t like it because at that time the Mac was only grayscale and Andy really liked color, of course,” says Matt Wrbican, chief archivist at the Andy Warhol Museum.
Back then, the Commodore Amiga was where it was at. The personal computer was able to display more than 4,000 colors; in a demonstration from 1985, you see a Commodore exec showcasing all 4,096 simultaneously on screen to a crowd’s enthusiastic applause. “So when the people from Commodore approached [Warhol] and the saw what their computer could do, he was a lot more interested in using that,” Wrbican says. “Plus they were willing to pay him a lot of money.”
As we already know, Warhol went on to create numerous artworks on his Amiga, none of which had been seen by the public until last month’s unveiling. In Trapped, a new short documentary from the Carnegie Museum of Art, we get an inside look at the long process of unearthing those files–plus a peek at a few new pieces of never-before-seen artwork.
The documentary stars some unlikely heroes: A group of computer experts from the Carnegie Mellon Computer Club. We watch as the engineers go on a technological treasure hunt with artist Cory Arcangel, decoding obsolete file types and waxing poetically about bits and photons. “In a way, a lot of the data and things we work with almost seems like it’s imaginary,” says Computer Club member Keith Bare. “It’s electrons in a machine. You can turn it into photons if you use a display, but in some sense it’s almost like it’s not even there.”
The highly technical saga is not without drama. There’s some real tension as the crew scrambles to save these priceless artifacts. “We couldn’t keep it on those floppies. Those floppies were about to fall apart. Literally the magnetic material is coming off,” says Golan Levin, head of Carnie Mellon’s Studio for Creative Inquiry. “If they stayed on the floppy any longer, those images would’ve been gone.”
At the end of the clip, we finally see Bare convert a .pic file to PNG. Then slowly, like you’d expect a machine from the 1980s might work, an image of a three-eyed Venus downloads onto the screen.
“Cory, what do you think that is?” someone asks in the background.
“I think that thats a Warhol that nobody has ever seen before,” he replies. “That’s what I think that is.”