What Google’s King of Crazy Ideas Wants to Take On Next 


As head of Google X, the search giant’s so-called “moonshot factory,” Astro Teller gets to think about big, hairy world issues for a living. He’s the driving force behind Google’s self-driving cars. He’s leading the way on glucose-monitoring contact lenses for diabetics. He has tried — and failed — to bring us jet packs that are actually safe. And yes, for better or worse, he brought us Google Glass.
But if Teller had his way, he told an audience at the TechCrunch Disrupt conference in New York on Tuesday, he’d be working on two other major world issues: energy and agriculture.
According to Teller, even making batteries 10 times more efficient by weight or volume “would change the world so radically we can’t even see what that could be.” This, he says, could feed not only electric cars, but electric planes. “That would just be the tip of the iceberg,” he said, wide-eyed behind his Google Glass.
There is just as much room, Teller said, to improve the agriculture industry. “It is the largest industry in the world. It is also the most inefficient industry in the world. It’s the cause of a lot of our solid waste and carbon emission problems,” he explained. “There’s so much opportunity there, so much opportunity.” For instance, a large percentage of the world’s arable land isn’t arable because it’s on a slope. 
“We can do better than that, guys,” Teller said. 
He repeated this phrase several times throughout his talk, positioning it as a kind of guiding principle behind Google X’s many moonshots. It’s how he described the thinking behind the glucose monitoring contact lenses. “Everyday, hundreds of millions of people stab themselves, bleed, and offer their blood almost in sacrifice to the glucose monitor they’re carrying with them,” he said. “This is not a good user interface. We can do better than that guys. We really can.”
Teller defines doing better as designing technology that feels invisible. “It vanishes into our lives,” he explained. “It says: ‘You don’t have to do the work. I’ll do the work. You don’t even have to do the work of thinking about the work. I’ll do that too.’”
That doesn’t exactly describe Google Glass. But Teller acknowledged that Google still has lots of work to make Glass fit that grand vision of the future. “Google Glass is not all the way there,” he admitted, “but it’s a good thing to aspire to.” 