Why Anonymity Apps Are So Healthy—And So Rotten 


As far as interviews go, it was a bit of a train wreck.
Last week, Michael Heyward was on stage at the annual TechCrunch Disrupt conference in New York City, shifting uncomfortably in his seat, raising his voice, and stumbling over his words, as TechCrunch founder Michael Arrington grilled him about Whisper, the anonymous social networking app Heyward helped create in 2012. Things grew tense, and Heyward became so agitated that, at one point, Roelof Botha, a Whisper investor sitting to Heyward’s right, gave the young entrepreneur a fatherly pat on the shoulder, as if to say: “Enough.”
The debate was over what Whisper is truly for. And by the end of it, the answer to that question was even less clear than it was before Heyward stepped on stage.
Whisper is one of a growing number of anonymity apps, where anyone can go to write something without putting their name on it, set it against a pretty background, and share it with the world. Many of these apps — including Whisper and another called Secret — advertise themselves as a safe place for people to spread the truth and feel understood online. But while many people do use these platforms as a sort of public personal diary, we now know that isn’t always how they work.
As Arrington pointed out, anonymous apps are also places where malicious rumors can spread. He used one recent Whisper post about actress Gwyneth Paltrow cheating on her husband as an example. For Arrington, that means that Whisper — and indeed all anonymity apps — are not fully living up to their promise of encouraging empathy. And that’s when things got heated with Heyward, who struggled to explain away the celebrity gossip and other nastiness on his app. The fact is, these anonymity apps have opened an online Pandora’s box that even their founders may have a hard time closing.
Since its earliest years, the popular internet has grappled with the problem of anonymity. Countless people have used it to game the contents of Wikipedia. The CEO of Whole Foods used it to talk up his own stock — not to mention his own haircut. And the list goes on. Eventually, things like Facebook and various commenting systems pushed back, laying down ways of ensuring that posts came with real names. But now Whisper and Secret are shoving the pendulum in the other direction, realizing that so many people crave anonymity and the kind of talk it generates. Even Facebook is eyeing a return to anonymity.
People like Heyward paint this as a good thing. But the full consequences of this trend are hard to predict. Anonymity is also a way of spreading untruths, not to mention outright nastiness. And because these are for-profit companies, the temptation to allow such things may be heightened, even if that contradicts the original mission. “Apps like Whisper and Secret are VC-funded startups looking to build a large user-base and monetize it. That’s their ultimate objective,” says Kevin Werbach, a professor of legal studies and business ethics at The Wharton School. “They are bound to face choices where their growth and monetization interests run counter to their desire to protect against harmful content.”
Heyward says Whisper’s “true north” is abundantly clear. “Right from the very beginning we wanted to create this place that was about positivity — and not just doing right by our users, but also trying to do right by society and kind of make the world a little bit better,” he tells me in the wake of his discussion with Arrington.
In many respects, Whisper has succeeded in that mission. It has already given a large number of complete strangers a support system they may not have had otherwise, and it has systems in place to direct users to a help line if they post about having suicidal thoughts. The company has also set up a non-profit called Your Voice to help people who suffer from mental illness. And it doesn’t allow the names of private citizens to be used on its platform. That way, everyday users are safe from potential slander.
But when it comes to the public domain, Whisper has taken a looser stance on its positivity mission. The Gwyneth Paltrow example is proof of that. And, according to Werbach, this approach may be in its best interests. “There’s likely to be more popular interest in gossip about Gwyneth Paltrow than some guy in suburban Cleveland, and that could translate to monetization,” he says.
Heyward says this is not the case. As he tells it, his team decided not long after Whisper launched that in order to create the safe place they envisioned, the community would also need to feel safe to comment on public figures, from celebrities to politicians. That way, they would be free to share sensitive information about public figures, from stories of abuse to human rights violations. The company’s internal editorial staff of 130 vets any posts about public figures, and if they’re deemed appropriate, they’re published on Whisper.
The trouble is that this still leaves a hole in the system, because what is and isn’t appropriate is a subjective thing. It also means that Whisper’s staff spends valuable man hours vetting posts like the Gwyneth Paltrow one. It’s hard to see how dedicating resources to such a task is furthering Whisper’s mission. Heyward insists the Paltrow post was a very rare case. He says the overwhelming majority of people use Whisper to get advice or for dating purposes. So the question becomes: if 99 percent of Whisper’s posts are already coming from genuine people seeking advice and empathy, why not make it an even 100 percent?
Heyward admits the company doesn’t yet have all the answers. “Listen, we’re making these decisions in real time to be totally honest with you,” he says. “Platforms evolve. We’re continuously trying to do the next right thing.”
The fact that these services are positioning themselves as a kind of new-age platform for whistleblowers is also problematic. Just because they’re anonymous doesn’t mean they offer any real protection from, say, government or law enforcement officials with a warrant in hand. Whisper’s own privacy policy reads: “You understand that WhisperText does not guarantee confidentiality with respect to any User Content you submit.” Secret’s privacy policy is much the same, stating it will share user information in response to a lawful request for information or if a user has posted something illegal.
On stage at TechCrunch Disrupt, Heyward went so far as to say Whisper could be a platform where, hypothetically, a former NSA official could go to report excessive government spying. But Steve Jones, professor of communication at the University of Illinois at Chicago, says otherwise: “There’s no way that Edward Snowden would have possibly used a service like Whisper, or any others of the kind.” He calls Whisper’s use of whistleblowing as a defense for its stance on censorship “disingenuous at best.”
Secret doesn’t specifically disclose what is and isn’t permitted on the site, except to say that hate speech, threats, bullying, and encouraging self-harm aren’t allowed. That means naming people and companies is fair game. Secret also connects to users’ contact list, meaning any rumors that do spread are likely to be more relevant to the people reading them.
Secret co-founder David Byttow also appeared on stage at TechCrunch Disrupt, and he too addressed the idea of vetting secrets. “We’re not in the business of true and false,” he said, explaining that Secret relies on its community to flag content. Then, Secret’s own staff decides whether the post meets the company’s internal criteria to be taken down. “Negativity can exist on the platform,” Byttow said. “It has to.”
It does. And many people will flock to it. The question is whether the negative outweighs the positive.