Why Kickstarter Doesn’t Want You to Profit From Your Donations 


When Facebook acquired the virtual reality startup Oculus VR for $2 billion, it was a huge win not only for Oculus founder Palmer Luckey, but also for Kickstarter, the crowdfunding platform that helped raise more than $2.4 million for Oculus. No other Kickstarter project had ever sold for so very much money, and Oculus became proof positive that crowdfunding had entered the big-time.
But, at the same time, many of the nearly 10,000 people who pledged money to Oculus on Kickstarter considered the sale a huge loss. It wasn’t just that Oculus, a scrappy open source startup, was moving under the wing of Facebook, one of the world’s largest tech companies. It was also that, because Kickstarter doesn’t give backers equity, they couldn’t share in the tremendous winnings that went to the Oculus founders.
In the near future, regulators will roll out new rules that will answer such complaints, allowing for equity crowdfunding, but despite the controversy over the Oculus sale, you won’t see this sort of thing on Kickstarter. Speaking at the TechCrunch Disrupt New York conference on Monday, Kickstarter CEO Yancey Strickler reiterated that Kickstarter has no interest in the coming equity boom. “We’re going to sit that one out,” he said.
Equity crowdfunding, which was first made legal by the JOBS Act in 2012, will soon allow everyday people to invest small amounts of money in companies and get an actual financial return if the company sells or goes public. Before the JOBS Act, equity investing was reserved for so-called “accredited” investors with a certain net worth. Once the SEC puts official rules in place (they’re still being ironed out), the new law will undoubtedly spawn a slew of new equity crowdfunding platforms. But Kickstarter, Strickler says, will not be one of them.
His reasoning is simple: Kickstarter was founded to help people fund projects that don’t look fundable on a surface level — things like board games and art projects. If Kickstarter were to offer people a financial return, Strickler says, it would naturally draw people’s attention (and money) to a different type of project. “What we really like about Kickstarter is projects are funded because people think they’re cool,” Strickler said. “Because of that, you get all sorts of weird, crazy things that get funded, and it’s just incredibly diverse.”
Kickstarter has declared its stance against equity crowdfunding in the past, but that was before Strickler took over from co-founder Perry Chen as CEO earlier this year and before Oculus earned a jaw-dropping amount of money in its sale. That Kickstarter is sticking with its story, even now, is an admirable display of solidarity with its original user base. And yet, it could cost Kickstarter in the long run.
Strickler’s right. The potential to get a return on investment will likely draw many more people to the crowdfunding space, and those same people will likely back a very different kind of project. In fact, they might not think of them as projects at all. Instead, they’ll approach them as future businesses. Because Kickstarter is taking its anti-equity stance the company is, in effect, driving this new audience of backers off its site.
You could, of course, argue that entrepreneurs might prefer Kickstarter’s model anyway. After all, giving away t-shirts and other merchandise to Kickstarter backers is a lot easier than dealing with 2,000 investors throughout your company’s lifespan. And yet, given how betrayed some backers felt after the Oculus sale, it’s possible that backers will begin to force founders off of Kickstarter and onto equity crowdfunding sites. 
What this means, in all likelihood, is that the next Oculus will not be funded on Kickstarter. And what that means is Kickstarter may well lose its top spot in the tech crowdfunding space to companies offering up equity. Of course, Kickstarter must see this coming. That might be one reason why Kickstarter has always positioned itself, first and foremost, as an important funding vehicle for art and culture projects. 
“I think art and culture are not a frivolous things. They help us shape the world and comment on it,” Strickler said on stage. As long as that base remains strong, Strickler seems to be okay with missing out on a potential watershed moment in equity crowdfunding. As he put it at one point: “I think there are things that are more important than money.”