World’s Many Databases Unite to Form One Simple Super-Service 


Choosing a database used to be simple. If you needed a way of storing and analyzing information generated by a website or some other business, you picked from a short list of databases that were more alike than different. But in recent years, this has changed.
In an effort to accommodate the increasingly enormous amounts of data flooding websites and businesses, a  seemingly endless list of companies and independent developers have built new databases that operate quite differently from the systems of the past, which were designed to juggle a relatively small amount of data on a single computer — not thousands of machines. The trouble is that each of these new databases has its own strengths and weaknesses, and sometimes you’re forced to chose two, three, or even four in order to get the job done.
Some are good at storing data in memory, so you can access it faster. Others are suited to storing “graphs,” which show the particular relationships between pieces of data. Still others are best used for things like online shopping and bank accounts. 
But Portland, Oregon-based startup Orchestrate.io wants to solve this problem. The company’s online database service, which launched today, provides a single place to store your data, but it can act like several different types of database at once.
The new database explosion started between 2006 and 2007, when Amazon and Google published white papers explaining how they scale their data storage systems across thousands of computer servers. Soon, we saw the rise of several open source projects based on these papers, including Hbase, Riak, and MongoDB. These mega-scale data stores were often referred to as non-relational or NoSQL databases, but these are catch-all terms. In truth, NoSQL refers to several different types of database.
These tools make it far easier to manipulate data in new ways, but they can also lead to more complexity, not less. If you install more than one, your IT staff has more stuff to manage. But modern companies typically stomach the added complexity because they believe the drawbacks are outweighed by the positives. “People run multiple databases in production because the pain of managing multiple databases is less than the pain of not being able to do what you want to do,” says Orchestrate.io co-founder Antony Falco.
His company aims to change the database landscape by providing a single system that does everything from full-text search to in-memory storage, graph analysis, and more. The company did this not by creating a new a database from scratch, but by stitching together several existing systems. Under the hood, Orchestrate.io includes the Hbase database, the Hadoop data crunching system, and the open source search engine Elastic Search, as well as a bunch of custom software. But the user never sees any of that complexity.
GameClash co-founder Tory Adams says his company’s game review app once ran on four different databases. Now, he has cut it down to just two — Orchestrate.io and Redis — and he’s in the the process of migrating the company’s Redis data to Orchestrate.io. “I’d like to use them for everything,” he says. “Their service is so simple to use.”
Simplicity is the key to the Orchestrate.io strategy, Falco explains. He was also the co-founder of Basho, the company behind Riak. Although he’s still enthusiastic about Basho, he says he learned some painful lessons while competing with MongoDB, the most popular NoSQL database out there. “Riak was really good, but it was hard,” he says. “MongoDB had a lot of knocks against it, but it was easy to use.”
Orchestrate.io isn’t the best choice for those who want fine tuned control over their database configuration — or who might want to use a different set of NoSQL technologies than those Orchestrate.io has chosen. But Falco is banking on there being enough customers willing to sacrifice that level of control in order to simplify their operations. “The companies that are going to win are the ones that focus on user experience and their core products,” he says. “Not the ones that spend a lot of time managing their own databases.”
What’s more, he believes that products should be not only easy to use, but easy to discard as well. To that end, Orchestrate.io automatically backs up your database to Amazon S3 storage account, making it easy to leave at any time. That may sound like a strategy that makes it harder for the company to retain customers, but Falco believes this will ultimately help the company gain trust and encourage customers to stick around. His tool is welcome change — in more ways than one.